---
title: Characters of irreducible representations
date: 2024-02-05
---

# Convolution

We write $\mathbb{C}[G]$ for the space of functions on $G$, viewed as
a permutation representation of $G$ (and we suppress the notation for
the homomorphism $G \to \operatorname{GL}(\mathbb{C}[G])$).

For functions $f_1,f_2 \in \mathbb{C}[G]$, we define their
*convolution* by the formula $$(f_1 \star f_2)(x) = \sum_{yz = x}
f_1(y)f_2(z).$$

If $V$ is a $G$-representation and $f \in \mathbb{C}[G]$, we define 
$$f \star v = \sum_{g \in G} f(g) gv$$
for $v \in V$.

**Remark:** 
:   1. For the basis elements $\delta_g \in \mathbb{C}[G]$ (i.e. the
       *Dirac functions*), we have $$\delta_g \star \delta_h =
       \delta_{gh}.$$

    2. The action of $G$ on $\mathbb{C}[G]$ can be described by $$g f =
       \delta_g \star f$$ for $g \in G$ and $f \in \mathbb{C}[G]$.

    3. Viewing $\mathbb{C}[G]$ as a $G$-representation, the two
       notions of $\star$ just introduced actually coincide:
	
       $$f_1 \star f_2 = \sum_{g \in G} f_1(g) \delta_g \star f_2.$$

    4. The product $\star$ makes $\mathbb{C}[G]$ into a *ring* (in
       fact, a $\mathbb{C}$-algebra) and $V$ into a
       $\mathbb{C}[G]$-module.  Mostly we won't use this fact - at
       least explicitly - in these notes.


    5. Let $W \subseteq \mathbb{C}[G]$ be an invariant subspace.  For
       any $f \in \mathbb{C}[G]$, we have $$f \star f' \in W \quad
       \forall f' \in W.$$

    6. The element $\delta_1$ acts as the identity for the $\star$
       operation. Namely, for $f \in \mathbb{C}$ $$f \star \delta_1 =
       \delta_1 \star f.$$ This follows easily from the fact that
       $\delta_1 \star \delta_g = \delta_g \star \delta_1 = \delta_g$
       for all $g \in G$.
	   

# Isotypic decomposition

Let $V$ be a $G$-representation and let $L$ be an irreducible
$G$-representation.

Consider the set $\mathcal{S}$ of all invariant subspaces $S \subseteq
V$ for which $S \simeq L$ as $G$-representation.

Set $$W = \sum_{S \in \mathcal{S}} S;$$
then $W$ is an invariant subspace of $V$.

**Proposition:**
:    $W$ is *isotypic* in the sense that any irreducible invariant
     subspace of $W$ is isomorphic (as $G$-representation) to $L$.
	 
	 Moreover, $[V/W:L] = 0$.
	 
*You will prove this in homework*.

We write $V_{(L)}$ for the invariant subspace $W$.

You will also prove:

**Proposition:**
:   If $L_1,L_2,\cdots,L_r$ is a complete set of non-isomorphic
    irreducible representations of $G$, then $$V = V_{(L_1)} \oplus
    V_{(L_2)} \oplus \cdots \oplus V_{(L_r)}.$$
	
	

# Results about the characters of the irreducible representations

## Investigation of certain idempotent elements in $\mathbb{C}[G]$.

Let $L$ be an irreducible representation of $G$ and let $W_1 =
\mathbb{C}[G]_{(L)}$.

Use completely reduciblity to write $$\mathbb{C}[G] = W_1 \oplus W_2$$
for some invariant subspace $W_2 \subset \mathbb{C}[G]$.

Note that $[W_2:L] = 0$ by construction.

We now write
$$\delta_1 = e_1 + e_2 \quad \text{for $e_1 \in W_1$ and $e_2 \in W_2$}.$$

**Proposition:** 
:    For $w_1 \in W_1$ and $w_2 \in W_2$ we have

     $$e_1 \star w_1 = w_1,\quad  e_1 \star w_2 = 0,$$
	 $$e_2 \star w_1 = 0, \quad \text{and} \quad e_2 \star w_2 = w_2.$$

**Proof:**
:    Fix $w_2 \in W_2$. We define a mapping
     $\phi:W_1 \to W_2$ by the rule
	 $\phi(w_1) = w_1 \star w_2.$
	 
	 We note that $\phi$ is a homomorphism of $G$-representations.
	 Indeed, recall the action of $g \in G$ on $\mathbb{C}[G]$ is the
	 same as that of $\delta_g \star$. Now
	 
	 $$\phi(\delta_g \star w_1) = (\delta_g \star w_1) \star w_2 =
	 \delta_g \star (w_1 \star w_2) = \delta_g \star \phi(w_2).$$

     Since $W_1$ is $L$-isotypic and since $[W_2:L] = 0$, the mapping
	 $\phi$ must be 0.
	 
	 Now conclude that $$0 = w_1 \star w_2 \quad \forall w_1 \in W_1, w_2 \in W_2.$$

     A similar argument shows that $$0 = w_2 \star w_1 \quad \forall
	 w_1 \in W_1, w_2 \in W_2.$$ (For $w_1 \in W_1$, one define a
	 homomorphism $\psi:W_2 \to W_1$ by the rule $\psi(w_2) = w_2
	 \star w_1$ As before, one argues that $\psi = 0$...)

     Now notice for $w_1 \in W_1$ that $$w_1 = \delta_1 \star w_1 =
	 (e_1 + e_2)\star w_1 = e_1 \star w_1 + e_2 \star w_1 = e_1 \star
	 w_1$$
	 since $e_2 \in W_2 \implies e_2 \star w_1 = 0$ by the preceding results.
	 This proves that $e_1 \star w_1 = w_1$ for all $w_1 \in W_1$
	 
	 Similarly, for $w_2 \in W_2$ we have $$w_2 = \delta_1 \star w_2 =
	 (e_1 + e_2)\star w_2 = e_1 \star w_2 + e_2 \star w_2 = e_2 \star
	 w_2$$
	 since $w_2 \in W_2 \implies e_1 \star w_2 = 0$ by the preceding results.
	 
     This completes the proof.

As an immediate consequence, we get:

**Corollary:**
:    - $e_1 \star e_1 = e_1$
     - $e_2 \star e_2 = e_2$
	 - $e_1 \star e_2 = e_2 \star e_1 = 0$.

We can actually find a *formula* expressing $e_1$ in the basis
$\{\delta_g\}$ for $\mathbb{C}[G]$:

**Proposition:**
:    Let $W_1 = \mathbb{C}[G]_{(L)}$ and suppose that $\mathbb{C}[G] =
     W_1 \oplus W_2$ for an invariant subspace $W_2$ as before. Write
     $\delta_1 = e_1 + e_2$ with $e_i \in W_i$. and let $\chi$ be the
     *character* of $W_1$.  We have $$e_1 = \dfrac{1}{|G|} \sum_{g \in G}
     \chi(g^{-1}) \delta_g.$$

**Proof:**
:    Fix $x \in G$ and define 
     $$\Phi:\mathbb{C}[G] \to \mathbb{C}[G]$$
	 by the rule
	 $$\Phi(f) = \delta_{x^{-1}} \star e_1 \star f.$$
	 
	 We are going to compute the *trace* of $\Phi$ in two different ways.
	 
	 First, Note that since $e_1 \star w_1 = w_1$ for each $w_1 \in
     W_1$, we see that $\Phi_{\mid W_1}$ is given $$w \mapsto
     \delta_{x^{-1}} \star w$$. Thus $\operatorname{tr}(\Phi_{\mid
     W_1})$ is given by $\chi(x^{-1})$.
	 
	 Since $e_1 \star W_2 =0$, we conclude that $\Phi_{\mid W_2}) = 0$
	 so that $$\operatorname{tr}(\Phi) = \operatorname{tr}(\Phi_{\mid
	 W_1}) \oplus \operatorname{tr}(\Phi_{\mid W_2}) =
	 \operatorname{tr}(\Phi_{\mid W_1}) = \chi(x^{-1}),$$

     On the other hand, let us express $e_1$ in the basis $\{\delta_g\}$ of $\mathbb{C}[G]$:
	 $$e_1  = \sum_{g \in G} \lambda_g \delta_g \quad (\lambda_g \in \mathbb{C}).$$
	 
	 Let us examine the mapping $$\theta_{x^-1g}:\mathbb{C}[G] \to \mathbb{C}[G]$$
	 given by $$w \mapsto \delta_{x^-1 g} \star w.$$ Recall that
	 $\mathbb{C}[G]$ is the permutation representation corresponding
	 to the action of $G$ on itself by left multiplication. We have
	 seen that the trace of the action of an element of $G$ is the
	 number of fixed points for that action. We conclude that the trace of 
     $\theta_{x^{-1}g}$ is $|G|$ if $x = g$ and otherwise is 0.
	 
	 Now, the mapping $\Phi$ is given by
	 $$\Phi(w) = \delta_{x^{-1}} \star \left( \sum_{g \in G} \lambda_g \delta_g \right) \star w
	  = \sum_{g \in G} \lambda_g \delta_{x^{-1} g} \star w
	  = \sum_{g \in G} \lambda_g \theta_{x^{-1} g}(w).$$

     Since the trace is a linear operator, we conclude that
	 $$\operatorname{tr}(\Phi)  = \sum_{g \in G} \lambda_g \operatorname{tr}(\theta_{x^{-1}g})
	 = \lambda_x |G|.$$

     Now comparing our two computations of $\operatorname{tr}(\Phi)$ we get the formula
	 $$\lambda_x |G| = \chi(x^{-1})$$
	 i.e. $\lambda_x = \chi(x^{-1})/|G|.$
	 
	 But then $$e_1 = \sum_{g \in G} \lambda_g \delta_g =
	 \dfrac{1}{|G|} \sum_{ g\in G} \chi(g^{-1}) \delta_g$$ as
	 required. This completes the proof.

**Remark:**
:    Since $G$ is a finite group, the eigenvalues of the operation of
     $g \in G$ on any $G$-representation are roots of unity
     $\zeta$. Notice that $\overline{\zeta} = \zeta^{-1}$ for any root
     of unity. In particular, if $\chi$ is the character of a
     representation of $G$, we have $\chi(g^{-1}) =
     \overline{\chi(g)}.$

**Corollary:**
:    Let $\chi$ be the character of $W_1 = \mathbb{C}[G]_{(L)}.$
     Then
	 $$\langle \chi,\chi \rangle = \chi(1).$$
	 
**Proof:**
:    Note that the Proposition allows us to calculate:
     $$e_1 \star e_1 = \dfrac{1}{|G|} \sum_{x,g \in G} \chi(g^{-1})\chi(x^{-1}) \delta_{gx}.$$

     The coefficient of $\delta_1$ in this expression is precisely
     $$\dfrac{1}{|G|^2} \sum_{g \in G} \chi(g^{-1}) \chi(g) = 
	 \dfrac{1}{|G|^2} \sum_{g \in G} \chi(g) \overline{\chi(g)} = 
	 \dfrac{1}{|G|} \langle \chi, \chi \rangle.$$
	 
	 On the other hand, $e_1 = e_1 \star e_1$ and the coefficient of
	 $\delta_1$ in the expression for $e_1$ is $\chi(1^{-1}) = \chi(1)$.
	 
	 Thus we see that $\chi(1) = \langle \chi,\chi \rangle$ as
     required.


We have so far elided the *multiplicities* $[\mathbb{C}[G]:L]$ for
irreducible representations $L$. We are going to state the result here
(and maybe prove it later).

**Theorem:**
:    For an irreducible representation $L$ of $G$, the multiplicity
     $[\mathbb{C}[G]:L]$ is given by 
	 $$[\mathbb{C}[G]:L] = \dim_\mathbb{C} L.$$

**Remark:**
:    If $\chi,\psi$ are the characters of representations of $G$, then
     $\langle \chi,\psi \rangle = \langle \psi,\chi \rangle.$
	 
	 Indeed,
	 \begin{align*}
	 \langle \chi,\psi \rangle = \dfrac{1}{|G|} \sum_{g \in G}
	 \chi(g) \overline{\psi(g)}
	 &= \dfrac{1}{|G|} \sum_{g \in G}
	 \chi(g) \psi(g^{-1}) \\
	 &= \dfrac{1}{|G|} \sum_{x \in G}
	 \chi(x^{-1}) \psi(x) \\
	 &= \langle \psi,\chi \rangle.
	 \end{align*}

Now we are able to prove that main Theorem which shows that the
characters of the irreducible representations form an *orthonormal
set*.

**Theorem:**
:    Let $U,V$ be irreducible representations of $G$ with characters
     $\chi,\psi$ respectively. Then 
	 $$\langle \chi,\chi \rangle = 1 \quad \text{and} \quad
	 \langle \chi,\psi \rangle = 0.$$
	 
**Proof:**
:    Let $W = \mathbb{C}[G]_{(U)}$ be the $U$-isotypic part of
     $\mathbb{C}[G]$ and let $\chi_W$ be the character of $W$.
	 
	 The preceding Theorem tells us that 
	 $\chi_W = m\chi$ where $m = \dim U$.
	 
	 Now, the preceding Corollary tells us that
	 $$\langle \chi_W,\chi_W \rangle = \chi_W(1).$$
	 
	 Note that $$\langle \chi_W,\chi_W \rangle = \langle m \chi, m
	 \chi \rangle = m^2 \langle \chi,\chi \rangle.$$
	 
	 On the other hand,
	 $$\chi_W(1) = m\chi(1) = m^2.$$
	 
	 Thus we find $m^2 \langle \chi,\chi \rangle = m^2$; since $m \ne 0$,
	 conclude $\langle \chi,\chi \rangle = 1$ as required.

     Now let $Y = \mathbb{C}[G]_{(U)} + \mathbb{C}[G]_{(V)}$ be the
     sum of the isotypic components.
	 
	 Note that $\chi_Y = m \chi + n \psi$ where $m = \dim U$ and $n = \dim V$.
	 Now we have
	 $$\chi_Y(1) = \langle \chi_Y, \chi_Y \rangle.$$
	 
	 On the one hand,
	 $$\chi_Y(1) =m \chi(1) + n \psi(1) = m^2 + n^2.$$
	 
	 And on the other hand, the preceding corollary shows that
	 \begin{align*}
	 \langle \chi_Y,\chi_Y \rangle &= \langle m \chi + n \psi,
	 m\chi + n \psi \rangle \\ &= m^2 \langle \chi,\chi \rangle + n^2
	 \langle \psi,\psi \rangle + 2mn \langle \chi,\psi \rangle \\
	 &= m^2 + n^2 + 2mn \langle \chi,\psi \rangle.
	 \end{align*}
	 
	 Thus we find
	 $$m^2 + n^2 = m^2 + n^2 + 2mn \langle \chi,\psi \rangle$$
	 so that indeed $\langle \chi,\psi \rangle = 0$. This completes the proof.

     
**Remark:**
:    In order to complete the proof that the irreducible characters
     form an orthonormal *basis* for the space of class functions on
     $G$, we still need to prove that the number of distinct
     irreducible representations is equal to the number of conjugacy
     classes in $G$.
